---
layout: post
title:  "Components of a blockchain-based coordination system"
date:   2021-05-15
---
Edit: I'm leaving this post up, but I'm not as interested in these ideas as I used to be, because I think we can do better. (In particular, I think it might be really important to design incentive structures that produce *good* emergent results, rather than creating systems like this that enable coordination for arbitrary purposes.)

---

Like I said [in an earlier post](/2020/12/19/blockchains-and-coordination.html), I'm getting very excited about the fight against [Moloch](http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/07/30/meditations-on-moloch/) (AKA coordination problems). Humanity is facing some huge challenges, challenges that we would totally be up to if only we could manage to actually work together… but coordination is very hard. (I don't mean that in a "the enemy is selfishness and hatred" kind of way; I mean it in a "the enemy is game theory" kind of way.) Markets are great at the kind of coordination that markets are great at, but we're pretty lousy at solving any kind of coordination problem that markets *aren't* great at. We need to get our act together. And blockchains might be the technology we need to accomplish that.

I want to outline a few quick thoughts about some weapons that we might wield in this fight:

  - Assurance contracts: the basic unit of coordination.
  - Ongoing decision-making structures (DAOs/delegation): because nobody has the expertise or patience to make decisions about every single damn thing.
  - Financial incentives (prediction markets, tokens): for ramping up support quickly and directing attention to promising proposals.

I'm feeling very enthusiastic and these ideas are only half-baked, so this post is going to be kinda scattered. But I want to find other people who are thinking along similar lines.

## Assurance contracts (AKA Kickstarter)

Kickstarter is *important*.

As Eliezer Yudkowsky once [wrote](https://equilibriabook.com/molochs-toolbox/) (in a dialogue involving a visitor from a saner world):

        Coordination isn't as simple as everyone jumping simultaneously every time one person shouts "Jump!" For coordinated action to be successful, you need to trust the institution that says what the action should be, and a *majority* of people have to trust that institution, and they have to *know* that other people trust the institution, so that everyone expects the coordinated action to occur at the critical time, so that it makes sense for them to act too.
        That's why we have policy prediction markets and... there doesn't seem to be a word in your language for the *timed-collective-action-threshold-conditional-commitment*... hold on, this cultural translator isn't making any sense. "Kickstarter"? You have the key concept, but you use it mainly for making video games?

In the economics world, the term for what Kickstarter does is [assurance contract](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assurance_contract). "I promise to do X, as long as enough other people do too." In particular, this can be used for crowd-funding a [public good](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_good_(economics)): "I'll chip in $20 towards the $1,000,000 goal, as long as enough other people do." People pledge to support the project, but they aren't actually obligated to follow through on that promise unless the total level of support for the project reaches some pre-set threshold.

I think that this fits pretty well with our moral intuitions regarding collective burdens. There's plenty of squabbling over the details, but as a general sentiment, people are often OK with paying their taxes, contributing to a group project, etc., as long as they feel like other people are also doing their "fair share" (whatever that means). That is, I'm optimistic about people's willingness to engage in this kind of cooperation *voluntarily*; a pessimist might say that humans can't do large-scale public-good projects without a government to collect taxes, but I don't think that's true. (I don't mean this to sound like some kind of anarchist/libertarian manifesto; I'm just saying that our difficulties in coordinating seem to me like a "we haven't yet built the necessary tools to help us overcome the game-theoretic challenges" kind of problem, not a "humanity is by its nature irredeemably incapable of this kind of cooperation" kind of problem.) Assurance contracts significantly mitigate (but don't completely solve) the problem of "I'm not going to bother donating because I don't really expect enough other people to also donate"; you can safely just hit the "pledge" button, confident that your money won't actually be taken unless the project actually reaches its target threshold. This means that, emotionally, making that donation is going to feel like "I'm doing my part in a big group effort", rather than "I might be getting taken advantage of by [free riders](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free-rider_problem)".

Assurance contracts are such a simple idea that they're practically a beginner-level tutorial exercise for Ethereum programmers. In fact, the basic smart-contract functionality is already implemented as the [RefundEscrow](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/4.x/api/utils#RefundEscrow) type in the popular OpenZeppelin library for Ethereum. But I don't know whether anyone has fleshed that out into a full dapp ("decentralized app") with a user interface like Kickstarter's. (I will totally write the code myself if no one has beaten me to it. Please let me know if this already exists.)

I'd love to see a basic assurance-contract system become widespread on Ethereum. Kickstarter has already popularized the basic concept, but it's not being used for anywhere near as much stuff as it could be useful for. (Part of the reason for this, obviously, is that the money that is earmarked for funding public goods is already being collected as taxes; public-good provision is one of the main roles of the government, so we aren't exactly eager to spend much of our after-tax money on it. I don't have a good answer to this, other than to say: yup, it sucks, but if there's some public-good project that you actually care about and want to see funded, maybe you might be willing to pay a little bit extra in order to *actually get it done*, as opposed to trying to cram it through our miserable political process.)

Anyway, the idea here is more general than just "I promise to contribute $X." Assurance contracts aren't just for funding public goods (although that is a gigantic and super-important use case all on its own). As Ethereum gains more and more types of basic capabilities (e.g. some notion of a [unique personal ID](https://www.brightid.org/)), we'll be able to make a wider variety of kinds of credible promises. "I promise to publish this piece of information." "I promise to switch from being a user of Twitter to being a user of Some Less Hateful Discussion Platform." (Actually, even without being able to directly express a promise as a completely ironclad smart contract, [oracles](https://changelly.com/blog/oracles-crypto-explained/) might allow us to verify the fulfillment of some kinds of promises.)

Assurance contracts aren't a *complete* solution to coordination problems, but they're a fundamental building block that a lot of other things can be built on top of.

## Ongoing decision-making structures

One objection to "let's coordinate using assurance contracts" is, "I don't have the expertise or the time to personally evaluate a whole bunch of different project proposals." Part of the appeal of government is that we delegate the collective-decision-making task to representatives and then (in theory) they make a bunch of decisions on our behalf.

So in our arsenal of solutions to coordination problems, I think there needs to be a place for "ongoing entity to which we delegate our decisions." Rather than decide on each project proposal individually, you delegate some of your money/voting-power/decision-making-power to some other person/organization.

As far as I can tell, the big buzz in this region of the crypto space is around [Decentralized Autonomous Organizations](https://ethereum.org/en/dao/) (DAOs). There are various DAO systems out there already; I'm not super-familiar with all of them, but I really like DAOstack's idea of [holographic consensus](https://medium.com/daostack/holographic-consensus-part-1-116a73ba1e1c), which has a clever approach to scaling up a DAO's ability to make large numbers of decisions. (More on that later in this post.) So maybe one useful approach for achieving coordination is to have people (voluntarily) pay dues to an organization that they believe in, and then the organization decides how to spend the aggregated money.

Personally, I'm feeling a bit skeptical about the idea of large DAOs; even a decentralized large organization is still a large organization. Even if a DAO's voting/reputation/decision-making system is some sort of fancy decentralized mechanism, I worry that that will result in many of the same kinds of problems that we currently see in ordinary large organizations.

An approach that I think I like better is "multilevel delegation". Rather than delegating your power/money to an organization, delegate it to a particular person you trust, in such a way that *that* person can further delegate to someone *else*. (Similar to [liquid democracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_democracy).)

The idea of delegation is nothing new – that's basically what our current representative democracy is supposed to be – but this kind of blockchain-based delegative democracy has some big advantages.

  - You could choose multiple delegates, each for a different "topic". ("I trust Alice on local community issues, Bob on big environmental issues, Carol on economic issues, etc.")
  - You could change your delegates whenever you want (as opposed to "every four years when an election is held"). If one of your delegates starts making decisions you don't like, you can easily switch to someone else, or just revoke the delegation and make your decisions yourself.
  - Your delegates could be people you know and trust (as opposed to "politicians").

Again, I will happily write the code for this kind of system if it doesn't exist yet. Does anyone out there know of some kind of multilevel-delegation system like this that already exists for Ethereum? Is anyone interested in working on this with me?

I should also mention [quadratic funding](https://vitalik.ca/general/2019/12/07/quadratic.html) here, as an example of a way to make the choices of which projects to fund. The idea behind quadratic funding is to look at other people's donations and use those to determine which projects to fund – kind of like ordinary [donation-matching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matching_funds), but using a different formula that's designed to identify public-good projects. The formula is: for any given project, take the square root of each donation, add those together, and square the result. So a project that receives a large number of small donations will receive more matching-funds than a project that receives a small number of large donations. (The choice to use square-roots and squaring isn't arbitrary; if you make certain fairly-reasonable assumptions, this is the math that corresponds to "people making their donation choices *as if* their choice is coordinated with other people's choices.") I can imagine a quadratic-funding system being a useful default donation-target for the aforementioned multilevel-delegation system: "I want this money to go towards public-good projects, whatever those happen to be."

These kinds of ongoing coordination organization/structures aren't meant to be an *alternative* to one-off assurance contracts; they're meant to be a layer on top of them. That is, I don't think it would be a good idea for project proposals to be tied to a specific DAO (such that a project only has access to the funds from that particular DAO and a member's dues can only go towards funding projects that are tied to that particular DAO); if there's a project you'd like funded, create a standalone assurance contract for it (using the general-purpose widely-familiar assurance contract system that hopefully exists), and then bring it to the attention of as many different DAOs (or people who have a lot of power delegated to them) as you want.

There's still the question of how to get their attention, though. That's what the third section of this post is about.

## Prediction markets

How do we identify which assurance contracts are worth paying attention to?

Also, how do we ramp up support *quickly*, so that when someone has a great new idea we can all adopt it within a reasonable time frame, rather than spending years trying to get traction? (I'm not advocating instantly collectively-jumping on every new fad that comes along; of course we should be cautious and deliberate. But it would be nice if we at least had the *ability* to move on new ideas as quickly as makes sense, rather than needing to struggle for an immense amount of time to make any sort of large coordinated jump.)

It's hard to get attention for a new idea. There's no *monetary* cost to pledging money to an assurance contract that fails to meet its funding goal (remember that the whole point is that you won't have to follow through on your promise unless the goal is reached), but there is a cost in *attention*. There will be lots and lots of project proposals out there; how do we direct attention to the ones that are likely to succeed? (I mean "succeed" in the sense of "reach their funding goal and be activated", not necessarily in the sense of "achieve whatever the project is intended to achieve"; that's a different problem, although prediction markets may be the solution to both.)

Or to put it another way: how do we overcome [network effects](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_effect)? Getting from, say, 25% funding to 100% funding is relatively easy, because by the time a project is 25% funded, a lot of people already know about it. Getting from 0% to 5% is the hard part. One of the main reasons why we're so lousy at coordinating is that it's often super-hard to find a [Schelling point](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Focal_point_(game_theory)) to come together around, from among the myriad possibilities.

I don't think this will completely solve the problem, but one thing that I think might help is creating a financial incentive for early correct predictions of success. As [Balaji Srinivasan points out](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3jPYk7ucrjo&t=16m12s), token upside is inversely proportional to network effect; you can make money if you get in early, *before* everyone else has figured out that this thing is going to be successful. That's exactly what we need in order to speed up the adoption process: to counteract the network effects that make it less worthwhile to join in until lots of other people already have, we need a force that will motivate people to join early, to get the ball rolling.

One way of doing this might be to create a prediction market along with each assurance contract, to allow people to place bets on the proposition, "Will this assurance contract reach its support goal?" (I'd like to see this integrated into the standard assurance-contract user interface: "Predicted likelihood of this proposal reaching its goal: 13%.") If you think this project is going to be popular, make some money by betting on it! (Of course, making money at this would require there to be someone betting against you. One idea from DAOstack's [holographic consensus](https://medium.com/daostack/holographic-consensus-part-1-116a73ba1e1c) system is to have a general pool of funds that bets across-the-board against new ideas; you can think of this as paying the prediction market for good ideas. I also expect that there'll be a niche in this ecosystem for people who watch for newly-created projects and bet against them. Most new ideas are lousy, after all; a discerning pessimist ought to be able to make money by betting against the pet projects of the unrealistically-optimistic.)

The real benefit of these prediction markets (which, again, is the cool idea at the heart of DAOstack's holographic consensus system) is that they serve as an information signal for the rest of us, to bring our attention to promising projects. Once these prediction markets exist, it ought to be easy to create notification systems that inform interested people/organizations whenever there's an assurance contract (within their area of interest) that is worth looking at. "Wow, this proposal is only 1% of the way to its goal, but according to the prediction markets it has a 20% predicted-chance-of-reaching-that-goal." (I just made those numbers up; I have no idea what typical numbers would be. But it seems straightforward to write code that will notice when a proposal has a higher predicted-chance-of-reaching-its-goal than other proposals at that same progress level.) Then the notification system can bring it to the attention of anyone who has subscribed to receive notifications regarding promising proposals in that area. (Different people will want to set their notification thresholds to different levels. Someone who's super-interested in a particular area and/or more risk-tolerant might want to receive notifications for likelier-to-succeed-than-average projects at the 0.1% progress level; others might be more interested in projects at 1% or 10% or 50% or whatever.) (And if anyone tries pumping up unpromising projects by betting heavily on them, that's just easy money for all the people who'll be notified.)

And besides prediction markets, if it's possible (for whatever the particular project is) to make a token that will grow in value as the project gains traction, do that too. Create a way for the early believers to make money by investing directly in the project, if they can correctly predict success.

I should also mention [dominant assurance contracts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assurance_contract#Dominant_assurance_contracts) here. I know that [Vitalik Buterin has expressed skepticism](https://forum.ethereum.org/discussion/747/im-not-understanding-why-dominant-assurance-contracts-are-so-special) about them; I don't really understand the idea or his objections well enough to be able to comment, so this paragraph is kinda lame, but if someone out there thinks dominant assurance contracts might provide some benefits that aren't already covered by the kinds of prediction markets that I've been talking about, I'd love to hear an explanation.

Whatever the particular mechanism, the goal is to create ways for people to profit if they can correctly identify *early* that a project proposal is a good one. That will create incentives for them to spread awareness of the project, and incentives for others to get in early as well. And the prediction market's predicted-chance-of-success is itself a piece of information that will draw the attention of other interested parties.

## Summary

I've just described three subsystems:

  - Assurance contracts are the basic unit of coordination: "let's collectively do X." They let people make contributions to collective efforts in a way that engages their "I'm doing my part in a big group effort" circuits, rather than their "ugh, I'm probably going to be taken advantage of" circuits.
  - Delegating money/decision-making-power (either to another person, or to an organization/DAO) alleviates the burden of having to make a gazillion of these decisions individually (but with much more flexibility and less wading-through-political-garbage than our current system).
  - Financial incentives (i.e. betting markets for predicting whether a particular assurance contract will reach its goal, or tokens representing shares of a new system) help counteract the "nobody wants to go first" problem, and allow us to create systems that will bring predicted-to-be-successful projects to decision-makers' attention.

With those three, I think we might have a decent story for how a coordination problem might get solved fairly quickly:

  - Someone says, "Hey, let's do X!" and creates an assurance contract for it.
  - Early on, very few people (maybe only the creator) will know about the proposal. But if those few believe that it's a good idea that could catch on, they can bet on it, and will then have a financial incentive to spread the word.
  - Notification systems can notice, "Wow, this proposal is only 1% of the way to its goal, but according to the prediction markets it has a 20% predicted-chance-of-reaching-that-goal," and bring it to the attention of anyone who has subscribed to receive notifications regarding promising proposals in that area.
  - The proposal gains a few more supporters, and a few more. Some of them bet on the success of the proposal; the predicted-chance-of-success goes up, bringing even more attention.
  - Pretty soon the proposal has a high enough predicted-chance-of-success that it reaches the inboxes of people/DAOs who have a significant amount of delegated-power to throw around.
  - It doesn't take much time after that for the proposal to reach its approval threshold. The assurance contract triggers, the proposal passes, the project is funded.

As cool as it would be to [replace a whole bunch of our civilization's existing institutions with code](http://www.adamspitz.me/2021/05/14/mundane-use-of-blockchains/), my excitement about blockchains is much more because of this coordination stuff. It's hard to overstate how much of the dysfunction of our current world can reasonably be attributed to inability-to-solve-coordination-problems. Anything we can do to make ourselves better at this is going to massively increase humanity's competence.
