---
layout: post
title:  "Bitcoin was brilliant, but we can do better"
date:   2021-10-15
---
My interest in the blockchain space has mostly been in Ethereum (and smart-contract platforms in general, but Ethereum is the main one); I didn't really know a lot about Bitcoin until recently, when I took some time to learn a bit more about it. So I want to write down my initial impression of Bitcoin.

(Nothing I say here will be interesting to Ethereum people *or* Bitcoin people; I'm mostly writing it for people who are new to this crypto stuff. When I tell my friends/family that I'm becoming interested in crypto/blockchain stuff, they generally nod and say something about Bitcoin - which is totally reasonable, since that's the first one and the one everybody has heard about.)

The most important thing to remember about Bitcoin is that it was the very first blockchain. This means two things:

  - It's morally immune to criticisms of the form "why are you doing things in this inferior way?". This is a "shoulders of giants" situation; Bitcoin was absolutely brilliant, and all of the progress we've seen in the blockchain world is building directly on top of its ideas. Sneering at it is completely inappropriate.
  - It has first-mover advantage, so it's still (at the time I write this) the largest cryptocurrency ([by market cap](https://coinmarketcap.com/)).

That said, Bitcoin is just not all that interesting to me these days, because there are several ways in which we can do better.

## Programmability

The most important shortcoming of Bitcoin is that it isn't a full Turing-complete computing platform. The purpose of the Bitcoin blockchain is to implement the BTC cryptocurrency; it doesn't do anything else. (My understanding is that there are blockchains out there, like [Stacks](https://www.stacks.co/), that do something like smart contracts for Bitcoin, but those are completely separate blockchains that don't inherit the security or decentralization of the Bitcoin blockchain.)

The point of a blockchain is that it's a trustworthy computing platform. That is an *extremely* useful ability, one that opens up a wide-open space of amazing possibilities. Cryptocurrency is *one* use for a blockchain, and it's a super-important fundamental use because it underpins everything else (and so all the other blockchains have their own currency), but it's a massive waste to have a blockchain that *only* does money and nothing else.

Again, this isn't meant as a criticism of Bitcoin in any moral sense; if I understand the history correctly, it took us a while before we realized that general-purpose blockchains were possible. I think there was a period during which people kept spinning up new single-purpose blockchains (e.g. [Namecoin][(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Namecoin)), each one for a particular single application. General-purpose blockchains aren't an *obvious* idea, but they're very clearly the right thing to do in retrospect, and so Bitcoin's inability to support smart contracts is a huge deficiency.

(EDIT: Ironically, Bitcoin's "Taproot" upgrade, which adds some features that should help Bitcoin do smart contracts, just showed up on my radar today. I don't know enough about it yet to know whether Taproot gives Bitcoin full programmability or not. But if it does, that'd be cool.)

## Less-wasteful consensus mechanisms

Another thing I hear a lot from my friends and family is, "Crypto? Isn't it bad for the environment because it wastes a ton of electricity?"

They're not wrong; Bitcoin's (and, for now, also Ethereum's) security *is* based on a consensus mechanism called [proof of work](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_work) (PoW). I keep meaning to write up a post about blockchain consensus mechanisms, but I haven't yet; for now, the important thing is that a blockchain needs *some* way of making it prohibitively expensive to launch a [51% attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-spending#51%_attack) in which a malicious actor buys up more block-producing power than the rest of the participants in the network combined, at which point the attacker can do various bad things. PoW achieves this by requiring block producers ("miners") to expend a whole lot of computational effort solving meaningless cryptographic puzzles (which is very expensive, in terms of both electricity and hardware).

This genuinely is a huge amount of wasted electricity; here's an article entitled [Bitcoin consumes more energy than Switzerland, according to new estimate](https://www.theverge.com/2019/7/4/20682109/bitcoin-energy-consumption-annual-calculation-cambridge-index-cbeci-country-comparison). It still might be worthwhile if we had no other alternative; it's not necessarily unreasonable to be willing to pay a large price in for the sake of the security of our monetary system. (It's not even obvious that this is a higher price than we already pay for the security of our current monetary system.)

But that's kind of a moot point, because there are other possible consensus mechanisms that just don't have this problem. One, which Ethereum is currently in the process of migrating to (and will hopefully be finished any month now) (although they've been saying that for years) (but seriously they really do look like they're actually super-close to being done), is called [proof of stake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_stake) (PoS). In PoS, the miners (called "validators" now) don't need to waste energy solving computationally-expensive puzzles; instead, they have to put up a whole bunch of ETH (Ethereum's native currency) as a deposit, which they will forfeit all or part of if they're caught cheating. PoS has many other advantages, too, besides just the environmental angle.

## Monetary policy

This one confuses me. I spent two weeks trying to teach myself macroeconomics just so to try to figure out whether Bitcoin's "there will only be at most 21 million BTC, ever" policy is a good thing or a bad thing.

Bitcoin proponents are *extremely* enthusiastic about Bitcoin's hard supply cap. They call it "sound money" and "hard money" and "digital gold" and talk about how it's going to revolutionize the entire world economy. I'm having trouble figuring out whether they're right or not.

As far as I can tell, most mainstream economists believe that there's an important role for active monetary policy, in a couple of ways: having a money supply that grows along with the economy (enough to produce a small-but-nonzero amount of inflation; generally 2% is considered about right), and also being able to increase or decrease the money supply in order to respond to various shocks that might otherwise produce recessions.

The Bitcoin people (and old-school gold-standard people - they're believers in basically the same idea, as far as I can tell) say, "To hell with all that; government can't be trusted with the power to print money. We've already seen numerous examples of how badly they abuse that power. Better to just have a fixed amount of money that nobody can screw with." That point makes sense to me too.

But the rest of the economists issue dire warnings about how having a fixed-size money supply is going to cause a [deflationary spiral](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflation#Deflationary_spiral).

The neat thing about blockchains, though, is that they enable us to create new currencies with whatever monetary policies we want, in such a way that those policies are written down in unalterable code, rather than being subject to the whims of the people who run the central bank. In addition to ETH (Ethereum's native currency), there are already lots of tokens built on top of Ethereum that are trying to be new and interesting forms of money. That seems to take the wind out of the Bitcoin advocates' sails; I suspect that the Bitcoin/gold people's "government can't be trusted" argument is right, but that the economists' "having a fixed-size money supply is stupid" argument is also right, and that smart-contract-based monetary systems provide a satisfactory answer to both objections.

So I generally think of this as another way in which Bitcoin isn't really good enough.

## If Bitcoin is so lousy, why is it still the most-popular one?

Honestly... I'm expecting this to change pretty soon.

I own a small amount of BTC, but mostly I'm betting on Ethereum.
